Is it possible for your mom to tell me a little more
about life in Mexico and the trip to Mexico to the
United States? Is it possible, ma'am? Su historia
de muchos años pesados. El viaje de Texas. Pues,
mira, lo que yo sé, te voy a decir un poquito, de
cuando vino ella aquí a estos estados. Sí. Bueno,
según yo he oído platicar, ella también lo sabe,
nomás que ahorita no se acuerda. Mire, mamá, lo que
le quiere decir ella es cómo vino a dar... Here in
Texas. You told me, and I know, my uncle first came
here to the States, right? The one with my mom? Yes.
Well, that's what she wants to know. In that one in
St. Rice that there was, at the beginning of Puras
Pastas, he was the one who came to give here. And he
was the one who, without the help of us, took us.
Yes. My uncle was the first? Yes. And who else? My
uncle Atanasio and my uncle Bernardo. They were
already here. They had a lot of time here, I think.
Brothers of you or your husband? No, he was my
mother's little brother. Brother of your mother?
Yes, my mother's little brother. And he comes
first? Where was your mother born? Well, I don't
know where my mother would have been born. But she
is from Mexico. She is from Mexico. Yes. Well, that
place where I am from, I think that place would be
her as well. I don't know. Yes. Well, tell me about
this trip. In what way did you come? By bus? By
train? But don't you
remember
the trip?
Well, the trip when he brought us here. Yes, the
trip here. Mom, you... Look, according to that...
I don't know, my husband is the one who fixed
everything.
Mom, what she wants to say, mom, is that you came
here hired. I don't know anything, Lupe. I saw your
father and he didn't tell me to see my mother. He
went through the bridge. Look, they went through,
you know, look, that's what I know. They came, they
came because my uncle. Yes. And he was uncle on
behalf of his mother, of her sister. Yes. See? He
was our uncle, who has been her brother-in-law.
Yes. Well. Y luego, un hermanito de su cuñado de
ella vino, fueron los primeros que vinieron pa'
Texas. Sí. Bueno. Según eso, ellos venían,
trajeron familias contratadas de México pa' acá.
Sí. Y que pagaban nomás la pasada. Ellos pasaron
por el puente y pagaban un nicle. Sí. Ándale. En la
fuente. En el puente. Eso sé lo que me acuerdo que me
platicaban los abuelitos y mi tío. Bueno,
entonces cuando ya estaban los tíos aquí, fueron
para atrás, ya ellos habían hecho poco dinerito
aquí, y ellos ya sabían, pero de ahí para allá yo no
sé cómo vendrían ellos, pero ellos decían que
pasaban por el puente y daban un nicle, ¿ves?
Bueno, entonces ellos ya se enteraron todo cómo
estaba aquí, entonces fueron por mi... mi
abuelito y mi abuelita y mi mamá que es ella y mi papá
entonces vinieron todos ellos juntos y luego una
hermanita de mi abuelita también y entonces se
vino su su esposo de mi tía mía también con ellos.
Esas dos personas los trajeron a ellos. Y no nomás a
ellos, mucha gente, porque los trajeron
contratados, una persona, no sé quién. ¿Ves? Pero
de esas gentes de los trabajos. Sí, estaba mucha
gente en este grupo. Ándale. Sí. Pero Guadalajara
está muy lejos de Texas. ¿En qué modo? Caminando
por Texas? O en qué modo fueron? Oh, ese sí. Este,
bueno, te juro que eso sí, no, no, no te doy razón yo.
De allí, ¿sabes en dónde estuvieron? Por eso no
caminaron mucho. Entonces, ellos pasaron y
estuvieron en... Brunsville. Brunsville.
Cheype. En Cheype.
Yes, there is a little town called Brozville,
Cheipe. I think they used to call it Cheipe, but now
it's Brozville. It's a prison. They were working
there with my family. They made money to walk
there. So when they got there, they were working
there, all that group. So they were making the cut.
They were barely making the cut. I think it was, now
you'll see, it was from Limburgo. In Limburgo.
That's where they arrived, they were just making
the cut. They were making it when they arrived.
Then from there, I don't know how long they would
last there, so they brought them here to this place
of Tlalcuta, yes, everything was Puro Monte.
Entonces, estaba la tienda que le decían el señor
Barras. Que yo no sé qué será de la señora. Where are
you? What's the lady's name? I don't know if her
father owned that store. All these people there
were dealing with that man. Everyone was going
there with that man who had a very big store that
they had already taken away. All these people were
going there with him. very close to my father and my
uncles and my grandparents and everything. Ay,
with that man. I think that my grandmother was Real
de Oro. Real de Oro. Yes, because my grandmother
was what she said. Yes. Real de Oro. Well, you
married in Real de Oro, right? Yes, I married in
Real de Pozos. Real de Pozos. Real de pozos. Real de
pozos y real de loros, y así le decían. O sea, cuál
será, pero allí decía mi abuelita. Sí. Minerales.
Es bonito allá. Puros cerros. Puros cerros. No,
puros cerros. ¿Cómo te pasa? Cerros, cerros,
muchos cerros. Y el pueblo está sentado abajo. Up
there, you can only see hills. Yes. If you look to
the side, there are puddles of water that come down
here. Yes. All hills. Pure hills. Yes. And down
there is the town. Did you live in the town? No. No?
Here on the banks where the mines were. Near the
mines? Yes, yes. On the back of the hills were the
houses. And the village was down there. What kind
of houses? Well, you know, houses of the poor.
Houses of stone, and also with earth. But they were
earthen houses, with terraces and rooms. Yes,
that's right.
They make houses out of grass. They make houses out
of... They make houses out of... They make houses
out of... They make houses out of... They make
houses out of... They make houses out of... They
make houses out of... They make houses out of...
They make houses out of... Tortillas to sell, my
grandmother. Yes. In Mexico? In Mexico, yes. Yes,
because I was afraid of one. Is there enough to eat
there in Mexico? Yes, but look at the money. Well,
yes, for your family there was enough to eat. There
is no money for the poor people, there is no work,
there is nothing. There is nothing? There is no
work? There are parts where there is no work. My
father used to pay 50 cents a day to clean the mines.
50 cents a day. And your husband too? No, my father,
when he was living next to my father, he earned 50
cents. Above the mine. There was a mine of what
material? Of copper or silver or what? Of pure
silver. Silver? Silver and gold and everything.
But look, they were all beating them up before they
left because they didn't want anything to happen
to them. Every time they were beaten up, they were
punished. All the doormen were at the door when
they left work. They were beating them up. And what
kind of work did your husband have? Your husband?
No, he was at the ranch all the time. Ah, so he wasn't
at the mines, only your father? No, my father who
worked at the mine. Was the life at the ranch better
than the life at the mine? Yes, it was better. Why?
Because I don't know why life at the ranch was
better. Because they raised the chickens, they
raised the sheep, they raised one who helped. Y en
los minas fue posible tener gallinas. Allí no hay
nada de eso, más de puro trabajo del esposo. No hay
comidas para... No, no hay nada. Pura piedra. Pura
piedra. Pura piedra. Y no hay toantes o nada. Vas tú
al agua, a los cerros. Sí. O trae el agua a los cerros
y aquí no estamos de cerca, entero de una estela
para acá. Ahí. Acá arriba el agua de Tamar. Sí. Ahí,
muy duro. There's no water nearby, right? No,
there's no water nearby. Was it necessary to bring
water? Yes, from the hills. For a long distance?
No, not very far. It's the side of the hills where
you go to swim. After you got married, did you live
on the ranch or in Nena? No, we lived on the ranch.
Until the first time, we lived on the ranch. No
neighbors or anything, just the ranch. Yes, all
the time, just the ranch. Yes, because my father
was, all the time since he got married, he was a
worker at the ranch. Oh, your father, your father,
you never lived on the mills. No, they live in the
ranch, but your father was alone. Alone, alone in
the ranch. Alone, alone, without his mother. Yes.
And you and your mother and the other children live
all the time in the ranch. Only ranch, yes. Only
ranch. No, because my mother was my daughter. Only
her daughters had my grandparents. Only her. Just
her. She and my other aunt. Just two. Two women. But
my other aunt got married in Mexico and she was with
my grandmother. Mi abuelito todo el tiempo iba a la
mina, pero ellas allí tenían su lugar como aquí,
pero mi abuelito iba donde estaba la mina a
trabajar. Mi mamá se casó, mi papá no iba a la mina,
iba a la labor todo el tiempo. Mi papá todo el tiempo
le gustó allá en México y aquí trabajar en la labor.
Nunca en las minas. No, he was always like that. But
your grandfather was a miner? Yes, my grandfather
was a miner. Did your grandfather's father also
work in the mines? No, the father of... The father
of your father, mom. The father of your father? No,
he worked in another mountain range. Another
mountain range? Yes, because he came to see us. He
came from another mountain range, I never knew. He
came to visit us and bring us any gift from over
there. Yes. But I didn't know where he was going.
It's just hills and mountains. Yes, but his work is
in the mines too? No, only my father does it. Only
your father? Yes, I don't know. His grandfather
is... his grandfather? Yes, grandfather, but he
doesn't... He's filling all those mountains over
there. Pure beings, far away. Was he a cappuccino
or what? The work in the labors? Well, I think he
also worked in the labors, who knows. I think, you
didn't know him, that he came there? Yes, because
he came to see us. I never heard his voice, never.
No, I didn't hear anything. No, because he came to
see us, to visit us. But two or three days later, he
was coming back. We were never right about your
farm, your house, no. And your ranch, was it
beautiful? The grandfather's. And you, mom,
where did you live? Oh, my little ranch is like
here. One ranch here, another one over there, and
so on. All the ranches are removed. No, mom, she
wants to tell you how we have it here, right? How was
your place where you were? Clean, beautiful,
something that you had there. Well, yes,
beautiful trees and everything. Tuna poles, and
well, when it was time. Yes. Yes. A lot of cranes, a
lot of tarpaulins, a lot of tarpaulins. Well, like
here, there's a lot of that. Did you go back to
Mexico again since you came to the United States?
No, my mom never went. I don't think I even know. I
don't think I even know where to go. Nothing.
Nothing? I fell like a stone in the well. I never got
there. My father never knew about his father, or
his mother, or his brothers. My father never knew
anything. And they made money and they didn't try
to go. Because since they didn't have papers to
fix, they didn't fix it at that time. They didn't
fix it, since they didn't bother them, they never
fixed it. So, my father never went there. No one
went there. Not even my brothers have fixed it yet.
Because they grew up here. My brother already
fixed it, he has everything. But he still doesn't
want to move there. But my mother never went. She
came here and she didn't know where to go. There is
sadness sometimes for your home in Mexico. You,
you, you think, mom, in Mexico. You have always
thought, mom, that, as Juanita says, what aunt
wouldn't want to come to Mexico, mom? No, no. I
mean, I don't have there, all those who stayed, who
were people of my husband, they were dead, they
were in the war, God knows, they would kill, God
knows. My whole family saw that it was my mother and
my father. It was my whole family. Yes, your mother
and father and everything was quiet. I would go to
see my mother-in-law. He never did the duty of
leaving. When I got there, I got upset. I said,
well, I was saving money to go to Mexico and he never
did the duty of leaving. Well, it's worth not
saying anything. I never went out again. Never,
never. He lost everything. Everything ended up in
Mexico. But I don't think mom wants to go to her
country because, since we haven't arranged a
permit for her, she can go because she's been here
for years. Yes, but I don't like it here in Mexico. I
don't think so. Well, I don't know. Because all the
time that I was in California, I really like it
there because I have a lot of friends there, I have
my children, and I would like to go there. But she
has her family here in the same place. But I'm going
to see her. Yes. I don't even have to go. I'm happy to
go to see my uncle, to see my uncle. I don't have
anyone. That's why
I'm leaving. I don't want to go to Mexico. Even if I
die,
I'll stay here. No, I'm not going. I have a friend
who went to Mexico. I think he's in San Luis Potosi.
It was the two of them, the two men in their truck. Y
ellos, dice mi compadre, comadre, hacía muchos
años que yo no iba allí. Dice, y siempre fui
reconociendo, dice, de tantos años hay cosas que
todavía hay cuando yo existía allá y que estaba
joven. Dice, y me siento contento, dice, porque
todavía hay cosas cuando yo estaba, mi tío y mis
hermanas y... And she says, I feel very good. But if
I go, I will look everywhere. I don't have anyone.
Yes, mom, but when you go, mom, and you look at one
thing, you... you will feel happy because you say,
no, I'm happy, I will feel like crying. Well, both
things. Because the heart is never happy. As you
wish, but there are things that one reflects in
those times,
be it with sadness, or it has to give it sadness and
pleasure, but as you wish. That's what my mother
says. No, because I know she doesn't. Because I
have to refuse my mother, my husband, and all that.
Do you believe that? No. This heart can't. This is
her land now. For many years. Yes. Because her
mother stayed here, and her father stayed here,
and my father stayed here, and all her children
stayed here. Yes. That's why I tell you, I will
never go to Mexico.
I go to California and I say, because of these
places I walked with my children, because of these
places I was very anxious, because of these paths I
walked, and we all walked together. And now I go
alone. Now that I went, I went with the two, well,
the three, with the daughter-in-law. There are
times that I go only with Janie and Asina, and you
always feel sad. You feel sad for life, right? Yes.
My life has been very sad. Your life has been very
sad? All my
life. Lupe has always been like that. His life has
always been sad. I felt more about my children than
I felt about my husband. I don't think a husband
feels like that. I don't think a husband feels like
that. And a husband who does well with one, will cry
until he dies, like it happened to me. My husband
was very good to me and his children. Mom struggled
a lot here because she didn't have a stove, she
didn't have anything. She would put the baths in
the fire and she would put a lot of tortillas and
everything she did. And I, you know where I grew up?
She used to put one of those little beds that they
used to make. Like this, in squares, a canvas and a
square, that's how they used to make it. And they
used to put it there, and they used to put me there,
and I would get wet, the air was the one that would
get me wet. Yes. It was there. There was a stick, it
was her crib. A stick, and she would hang it on the
crib and roll it there. I never went to the
hospital, I never went to the doctor, I never
did anything. I got married and now I've been to the
hospital twice. Y esta última vez que yo estuve en
el hospital, yo me sentí muy a gusto. Porque nunca
había descansado como descansé ese día, esas
veces que estuve en el hospital. Yo creo que estuve
tres semanas. Hasta entonces, descansé de tan mi
larga vida a trabajar. ¿Ves?
Y eso es... No, me salió de buenas vidas y buenos
pensamientos. Sí. Because she gave birth to her
whole family. I know you gave birth to both of your
children. They got married a year ago. Two years
ago, right? You gave birth to both of your
children.
They came out of here like a little lady. They got
married. And a lot of very fine children. That's a
good thing in life. I think. And you also had 12.
Twelve children? Yes, twelve children. And all of
them lived? Yes, all of them were taken away by God.
And my family was taken away too. Only three of them
stayed with me. I was the only one who was married. I
was the only daughter of my mother. And I was the
only one who was married. You? Yes, I was the only
one who was married. There were twelve children
and only one was married? Yes, my two brothers. Oh,
two brothers. We were two brothers and a woman, and
two men. From twelve to only three I got married.
For what reason did you never get married, your
children, your other children? Well, they lasted
a long time, my mother, my brothers. The youngest
had seventeen years. The youngest of her sisters.
How old is your sister? 17 years old. 17 years old.
She's young. But she died. But they died. I don't
have any more sisters, only my two brothers. Your
two brothers? Yes. And they are married? She was 17
years old when she died, the youngest. Oh, she
still died? Yes, yes. My brothers are married. Two
brothers and how many sisters? There were twelve.
Twelve. There were eight. Ten. Ten sisters. There
are ten daughters. No fueron ocho, porque los
otros son hombres, bebitos. Ocho mujeres y cuatro
hombres. Y dos hombres vivían y se casaron. Pero de
estas mujeres solamente una se casó. Y las otras,
¿dónde viven las otras? They all died. All the
little ones and the big ones, they all died. I was
the only one left as a woman. Of all the sisters,
only me. And my two sisters. All the sisters died.
They are sisters. But where did these big sisters
live? Oh, they were with my mom all the time. All the
time? Yes, with my dad. Ah, also. Now they live
together. They filled a table like this one for
another family. Ah, yes. Yes. Well, for what
reason did these others never get married? No,
they left, they came back. To the world, my
daughters. They never... They were not dancers,
they were not of any taste. Well, maybe, for what
reason did you get married? Well, so you can see,
because I was the first one to get married. The
first one to come, and the first one to get married.
Oh, yes. Yes. But my sisters, look, they lasted a
long time. Yes. No, mi hermanita.
Mi hermanita, la más chica que todas, ella tenía 15
años cuando se casó. Hay otra. Ah, otra. Otra, pero
ella se fue con el esposo para México. Ah, sí. ¿De
qué parte de México? Ahí está en el 18 de marzo. Sí.
Ahí es donde está ella, al otro de Matamoros. Sí.
Allá está ella, pero ella ya se murió. Ella no está,
mi hermana. No? No. We haven't seen my sister or
anything. Because she left in... I
don't know if it was in 1941 or 1942, she left with my
sister. And she never writes or anything? No,
she's already dead. She died. She died. She left
two children. Yes. Yes, now there's one here in...
Near Amarillo there is a nephew who is the son of my
sister. Yes. There he is. He only left two men and a
woman. But it ended so well. And there they are now.
First when they left, now it is beautiful. Yes, now
it is beautiful. Have you never been to that place
in Mexico? Have you been to Mexico? I know a lot of
places in Mexico. I lived for three months in
Urapán, Michoacán. It's
a beautiful town. Very beautiful. It's very
beautiful. The state of Guadalajara, I think, is
very beautiful. The mountains are beautiful, the
trees, the fields are green. Yes, I like Mexico
very much. The land is very beautiful. The land is
very beautiful. Yes, Mexico is very beautiful.
What happens is that the poor people have to come
here to look for a better way to live. That's what
happens. Like us going to California. I went
because I really liked to know. I had never been
there. Me gustaba porque allá pagaban más, me
gustaba porque aquí no había nada. Allá te cansas
tú, mejor te cansas tú de trabajar, que el trabajo
se acabe. Necesitas tú decir, ya me cansé, o decir,
estoy malo, porque en esos estados todo el tiempo
hay trabajo. Solo en invierno duras dos, tres
meses. that there is no work because of the winter,
but not because of it. In California, only the
water or the cold was removed, and you are going to
step on the cotton. Yes, there is a time here that
there is a lack of work. Yes. In winter, or what
time? Here? Yes, in Texas. Well, here in Texas
there is no
January, December, October and all that. Many
months. Many months, yes. That's why you had to go.
Those who want to go, they go to where there is work.
And I left because I wanted to go to other states. I
worked there alone and I had a lot of money to
support my kids because I earned 10 pesos a day. So
10 pesos a day I did it very well with the boys, and
then two or three days that they were off, they
worked. And they paid them very well, so that we
worked very well. And here, where do you work? Here
there was not enough work. Only the pizca season
and that was it. In Washington, it's the same. In
winter, it's hard in Washington. But if you work in
Washington for three or four months, you get the
same job. And you earn more, twice as much. Yes, we
have to go all the way to Mexico. We're not going
anywhere. That's why I liked it a lot. It's the same
as here. It's like a ranch. I don't ask about
anything because I don't know. It's like a ranch.
Was there a owner in the ranch over there? We came
from over there to come here. From Sunrise to the
ranch. To build one in the ranch. She's talking
about your boss, mom. Did you work with a boss? In
Mexico? Yes, my husband did. What's the name of
your husband's boss in Mexico? Do you remember? I
don't even remember.
It's been a long time. His name was Abundo Ayala.
What? Abundo. Abundo Ayala. Abundo Ayala.
Abundio Ayala. Ayala was the boss. It was a farm
there where my husband worked. It was a farm? What
was the name of the farm? I don't know, but the owner
was Abundo Ayala. Abundo Ayala. That's where my
husband worked with him. They didn't live there
because of the fire. The one in Hacienda is called
Rancho Grande. Yes, I understand. The one in
Hacienda is called Rancho Grande. It's just that
it's different from what they say
here. And Mr. Ayala, what happened to him? Who
knows? Who knows, but we came here. God knows, they
will live, they will die, God knows. No, well, if
they lived, you realize that if I went over there
and stayed with the place, I would go down to my
house, because that's where we came from. That's
where they lived since they got married? Yes,
that's where they worked. He was a horse herder, a
horse herder of animals, he did all the work there.
He
would be stronger, I don't know. My father liked a
lot to tie the horses or whatever, and to knock them
down. He wasn't afraid of the animals. He had a lot
of courage for that. Yes. He really liked to eat
manganese and manzanas and everything. He really
liked the tobacco. And does he want to leave
the farm? In those days, his mom and dad went to
Texas. Does his husband really want to go to Texas
too? To go to Texas too? Well, they don't exist
anymore. They all died. They don't exist anymore.
But they never went, they never went to the west, to
Mexico. No, they don't want to go. They never
wanted to go. They wanted to go, but they didn't. I
don't know. I still go because my husband never
said, let's go to Mexico.
And I, a very poor person, told him, let's gather
money little by little and let's go to Mexico.
Because he had all his people in Monterrey. No, no.
And now, he didn't want to say that we were going in a
bus, because we had a car. No, never. And now that
I'm alone, my boy, Rudy, let's go to Mexico, mom.
Let's go. This girl who is in Pennsylvania, now
that she came, we went two or three times to Laredo.
And Juanita also took me to Mexico. And no... Ya de
hora que nosotros tenemos carros, vamos pa' todas
partes. Sí. Y ahora dice, ahora que me den las
vacaciones, vamos pa' California. Le digo, pues
sí, sí, vamos. That's why the thought, the person
has it since they were little. When she was in low
grade, all the time she would tell me, mom, when I
grow up, let's say I'm a girl and I finish school and
go to work. I'm going to buy a car, she would say, and
then I'll take her everywhere for a walk, she would
say. And I tell her, look, it seems that God granted
you, because now that she finished her school, she
then bought her first cart, and now she bought
another cart, and she takes me everywhere,
wherever I tell her to go, I just tell her... Get out
of work and let's go. See? God granted us, He
granted you to take us for a walk. Yes. Yes. Well,
this is one of the most interesting stories I've
heard. You've heard. Yes. And thank you very much.
Yes, well, look, I have had, as it was that my boy, I
lost him, right? Yes. I wanted very much to see for
myself La historia de su vida. Y fue lo que me dijo mi
muchacho, mamá, usted debió de haber puesto en el
papel, dijo, la historia de la vida de mi hermano. Y
le dije, pues sí, pero como yo no sé leer, si yo
supiera leer, cállate. Yo estoy, estoy, estoy,
estoy de todo. Porque dice mi mamá que yo no sé por
qué yo, mira, I bring money, I bring things like
that, whatever I buy. I don't know where, so much
that I raise it, I don't know where it is. And you see
everything I've been telling you. And I have many
more things. And how is it being recorded? How do I
have all that? You see? Because as I told you
before, that I, I had thoughts for my children and
for my husband. Because the advice that I gave to my
children, I gave them to my husband. But he never
took them. He forgot them. And that's why I tell my
mother, I tell her, if I lost, and I have lost my head
since I got married, just like his, I wouldn't have
had my children, I wouldn't have known about my
children, I wouldn't have known about anything.
But no. I thought that I had to take care of my
children. Yes. And I had to, if not, well, I
couldn't have. And that's what I tell him, and I
always find out with my children, with my
daughter, Why don't they raise their family like I
raised them? Because it's very nice that they say,
as always, that it's not that they appropriate me,
but always the people where we have lived have been
envious of my family. Why do I have what I have? ¿Por
qué yo tengo carro? ¿Por qué yo esto? Porque
trabajo y mis hijos trabajan igual a mí. Y yo ando
con mis hijos. All together. If I wasn't going to
work, I wasn't going to go to work alone. No. I
rested my daughter too. I was going to work, she was
going to go. I never admitted that. Not that I was
going to church alone, not that I was going to go
with anyone. All together, all together. An
American lady told us when we got to work, we were
going to get there and they said, grab so many
surcos. And they would come and grab my boys, and if
not me, I would grab them all. And the American lady
would say, look, here comes the guajolata with the
guajolotitos.